this week
we've seen the first potential timelines
laid out for the lifting of restrictions
but with so much uncertainty still ahead
can we ever envisage a client
when we will be totally free of the
virus
[Music]
an answer to when that day might come
could lie in mathematics and in this
fairly simple formula it's all about
h the herd immunity threshold that's the
percentage of people who
must be immunized in the population to
stop the disease from spreading
and we can work that out if you know
these two things r naught the
reproduction number
which is how easily the virus spreads if
there are no restrictions
and e vaccine efficacy
a measure of how well the vaccine is
working
let's plug in numbers for coronavirus
we'll assume
the baseline r naught is three and we'll
use an average efficacy of the two
vaccines currently in use
around 79 this gives a figure of 84
of the population that need the job to
achieve herd immunity
about 56 million people
now we've been immunizing 2.5 million
people a week
and at that rate we should reach herd
immunity by november 2021
but our figures make huge assumptions
that are tricky to pin down
in the real world let's leave the
reproduction number our naught for the
moment
and turn our attention to efficacy
so efficacy is a measure of how well a
vaccine can protect a person
from an infectious disease in this case
coped if a vaccine
in a clinical trial has shown to have an
efficacy of
of 50 um this roughly tells us
that we can expect those people who are
vaccinated to have a 50
reduced risk of becoming sick compared
to
an otherwise similar unvaccinated group
of people
so if i understand that correctly it's
not as though the vaccine just
switches off our risk of getting the
disease it's more that it
reduces the risk of us getting the
disease it kind of dials it down
yes um what we know say about
um the astrozenica vaccine is that it
reduces
um disease and what we've also seen is
it reduced
hospitalizations so how severe the
disease is and and
whether you need to go into hospital
however the the clinical trials
that were done for for all the vaccines
or the majority of vaccines
um did not look at transmission whether
you can still
become infected you don't get severe
disease but you could pass that
infection on to someone else
early indications suggest the
astrazeneca vaccine
may reduce transmission by around 67
but more robust data on all the vaccines
is needed
expressing vaccine efficacy as a single
exact figure like this
is useful for illustration but it's a
little bit simplistic
for real life it assumes the vaccine
protects
equally well against infection as
disease
and that the vaccines will be just as
effective in real life
as they were in clinical trials
to get an idea of how even a small
reduction in the real life vaccine
effectiveness affects
our formula let's see what happens if we
reduce the efficacy figure by just a
couple of percent
so instead of our 79
let's use 77.
if we do that what we'll see is that the
percentage of people who have to be
immunized to reach
herd immunity goes up
from 84
to 87
and small changes matter this could
delay when we get back to normal
by weeks and then of course there's our
naught
the reproduction number at the beginning
of the pandemic
scientists thought one infected person
would on average
infect three others
they go on to infect three more and so
it spreads through the population
but epidemiologist mark jet has found
that the increased transmissibility of
new variants
could have changed this number we
knew that the proportion of cases with
this variant was growing in some parts
of the uk
so what we did then was to take this
data and say
actually what set of parameters for this
virus is consistent with what we're
seeing in the world
and we found that the new variant was
about 50 percent
more transmissible we started off with a
reproduction number of three and so 50
more of that would be around four or
four and a half it's difficult to say
because um we haven't seen how fast this
variant spreads without any restrictions
at all
but i think our sort of best guess would
be about four four and a half yep
let's be optimistic and use a baseline
reproduction number
of four and let's keep our efficacy
figure at 77 percent
what you'll see happening then is that
our herd immunity threshold
leaps up from 87 percent
to 97
but will we ever be able to vaccinate
that many people
in reality so roy herd immunity
actually works really well doesn't it
with some diseases
it works very well i mean the best
example in the united kingdom
is the introduction of measles
vaccination roughly in 1960
768 and slowly over a period of a few
decades we built up sufficient immunity
in the population that measles
went from 800 000 cases a year down to
less than a thousand cases a year we
eradicated the transmission
of measles in the community
in britain our success against childhood
measles
shows that achieving very high
vaccination levels against covet 19
might be possible but there's one other
real world thing to consider
we've got new strains coming into play
so
it's important to recognize that the
duration of immunity for this
coronavirus vaccine
set is unknown at present and we will
only find this out in subsequent years
what i do think is that we will
eradicate
serious morbidity and mortality
and hopefully it will become one of
these things where every year like
influenza you have a
vaccination against it protecting those
at risk with vaccines may allow us to
live with the virus
even without herd immunity and as we've
heard this
week this protection could help us
emerge from many of the current
restrictions
as we head towards the summer what we
all want
is to be able to see and be with each
other again safely
the way to get there is to make sure
that population immunity is as high as
possible and vaccination means that we
can
all play a part